src/doc/docs/aspects/constraints.md, before:

---
title: Constraints Aspect
tags:
- aspect
---
# Constraints Aspect

The constraints aspect defines constraints for the concepts of the language.

- [official documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/constraints.html)

## General

!!! question "How do you hide inapplicable operands in dot expressions?"

    [Dot expressions: hiding inapplicable operands](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/dot-expressions-hiding-inapplicable-operands/){{ blog('sl') }}

!!! question "Are there any useful helper classes?"

    - {{ mps_url("@mps.ModelConstraints") }}: This class can calculate the constraint/scope of a specific concept/node programmatically.

## Properties

!!! question "How can you set default values for properties?"

    Use the language ^^com.mbeddr.mpsutil.propertydefault^^ from {{ mbeddr_platform() }}.

!!! warning "The property value isn't valid."

    Specific Languages Blog: [Invalid property values](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-02/22-invalid-property-values/)

## References

!!! question "How can you emulate references?"

    [Pseudo-references: emulating references](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-02/02-pseudoreferences/){{ blog('sl') }}

## Scopes

!!! question "How do you filter scopes? Which scopes are available?"

    [FilteringScope](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A314576fc-3aee-4386-a0a5-a38348ac317d%28jetbrains.mps.scope%29%2F3961775458390497664) takes an existing scope and can do the filtering. [Using reference scope | MPS documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/scopes.html#usingreferencescope)
    lists some other scope implementations.

??? question "What's the best way to wrap a list of nodes into a *Scope*?"

    > I have a list of nodes and want to wrap them into a scope.
    > How do you do that?

    You're probably looking for `#!java ListScope.forResolvableElements(sequence<node<>> elements)`.

    **forResolvableElements**
    creates list scopes and also implements getName(child) like forNamedElements, yet returning the resolveInfo if the node is an {{ mps_url("@mps.IResolveInfo") }}, the name if it is an {{ mps_url("@mps.INamedConcept") }} or else calls `#!java getPresentation()`.
    
    **forNamedElements**
    
    I'm unsure about the use-case of `#!java ListScope.forNamedElements(sequence<node<>> elements)`, but it behaves unexpected in some cases:
    
    Note that elements with a blank name are not part of the scope created by `ListScope.forNamedElements(sequence<node<>> elements)`. They'll get silently omitted.
    
    Note that elements that are not an instance of {{ mps_url("@mps.INamedConcept") }}, will make `forNamedElements` throw an exception.

    {{ contribution_by('abstraktor') }}

!!! question "How can you combine scopes?"

    Use the class {{ mps_url("@mps.CompositeScope") }}.

!!! question "What's the difference between *parent scope* and *super.getScope*?"

    A parent scope asks your node or up in the hierarchy for the scope until it finds a scope provider.
    `super.getScope` will use the implementation from the super-concept.

Commit message:

Add some information to sections that don't have an introduction

src/doc/docs/aspects/constraints.md, after:

---
title: Constraints Aspect
tags:
- aspect
---
# Constraints Aspect

The constraints aspect defines constraints for the concepts of the language.

- [official documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/constraints.html)

## General

You can create new constraints using the concept `ConceptConstraints`. The "new" experimental constraint rules still might
not support all the features of the old approach.

!!! question "How do you hide inapplicable operands in dot expressions?"

    [Dot expressions: hiding inapplicable operands](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/dot-expressions-hiding-inapplicable-operands/){{ blog('sl') }}

!!! question "Are there any useful helper classes?"

    - {{ mps_url("@mps.ModelConstraints") }}: This class can calculate the constraint/scope of a specific concept/node programmatically.

## [Properties](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/constraints.html#propertyconstraints)

You can use property constraints to add setters, and getters and check if a new property value is valid. The getters are especially
useful for setting properties based on other properties. Example: A wrapper concept that referencable a node can use the name of the
reference as its name. For a reference *r*, you can implement [INamedConcept](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A00000000-0000-4000-0000-011c89590288%28jetbrains.mps.lang.core.structure%29%2F1169194658468) in your concept and set the property getter of
*name* to `r.name`.

!!! question "How can you set default values for properties?"

    Use the language ^^com.mbeddr.mpsutil.propertydefault^^ from {{ mbeddr_platform() }}.

!!! warning "The property value isn't valid."

    Specific Languages Blog: [Invalid property values](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-02/22-invalid-property-values/)

## [References](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/constraints.html#referentconstraints)

You normally add a node reference constraint to set the scope. The inline scopes and inherited scopes both have advantages and
disadvantages. You normally use the inline scopes where you can extract the scope into a utility class when you want to reuse it.
The inherited scope is often used for references that inherit the referenced concept's scope. It makes finding the original scope declaration harder, though.

!!! question "How can you emulate references?"

    [Pseudo-references: emulating references](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-02/02-pseudoreferences/){{ blog('sl') }}

## [Scopes](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/scopes.html)

!!! question "How do you filter scopes? Which scopes are available?"

    [FilteringScope](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A314576fc-3aee-4386-a0a5-a38348ac317d%28jetbrains.mps.scope%29%2F3961775458390497664) takes an existing scope and can do the filtering. [Using reference scope | MPS documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/scopes.html#usingreferencescope)
    lists some other scope implementations.

??? question "What's the best way to wrap a list of nodes into a *Scope*?"

    > I have a list of nodes and want to wrap them into a scope.
    > How do you do that?

    You're probably looking for `#!java ListScope.forResolvableElements(sequence<node<>> elements)`.

    **forResolvableElements**
    creates list scopes and also implements getName(child) like forNamedElements, yet returning the resolveInfo if the node is an {{ mps_url("@mps.IResolveInfo") }}, the name if it is an {{ mps_url("@mps.INamedConcept") }} or else calls `#!java getPresentation()`.
    
    **forNamedElements**
    
    I'm unsure about the use-case of `#!java ListScope.forNamedElements(sequence<node<>> elements)`, but it behaves unexpected in some cases:
    
    Note that elements with a blank name are not part of the scope created by `ListScope.forNamedElements(sequence<node<>> elements)`. They'll get silently omitted.
    
    Note that elements that are not an instance of {{ mps_url("@mps.INamedConcept") }}, will make `forNamedElements` throw an exception.

    {{ contribution_by('abstraktor') }}

!!! question "How can you combine scopes?"

    Use the class {{ mps_url("@mps.CompositeScope") }}.

!!! question "What's the difference between *parent scope* and *super.getScope*?"

    A parent scope asks your node or up in the hierarchy for the scope until it finds a scope provider.
    `super.getScope` will use the implementation from the super-concept.
