src/doc/docs/aspects/generator.md, before:

---
title: Generator aspect
---

# Generator aspect

> Generator is a part of language specification that defines the denotational semantics for the concepts in the language.
>
> — <cite>MPS documentation</cite>

## General

!!! question "Are there any best practices for generators?"

    - [coolya: Maintainable MPS Generators](https://coolya.github.io/maintainable-generators/)

!!! question "Can you invoke the generator from an external tool?[^2]"

    Yes, it can be run from Ant.

!!! question "How can you copy the output to another location?"

    Use the [@CopyOutcome](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A4d7d5410-8d5a-45f2-a2f2-a6b7b42a377e%28jetbrains.mps.lang.makeup.structure%29%2F12232831069847415239) annotation.

!!! question "How do I obtain a temporary model?"

    Use the class [TemporaryModels](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=6ed54515-acc8-4d1e-a16c-9fd6cfe951ea%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.smodel.tempmodel%28MPS.Core%2F%29%2F%7ETemporaryModels).

??? question "Which variable names aren't available because they are used in the generator?"

    ^^Underlined^^ variables are specific variables that are available.

    - Console: ConsoleContext **context**, ConsoleStream **console**
    - Constraint:
        - Scope: ReferenceConstraintsContext **_context**
    - Typesystem:
        - all rules: IsApplicable2Status **status**, TypeCheckingContext **typeCheckingContext**
        - comparison rule: SNode **node1**, SNode **node2**, 
        - inequation replacement rule
            - custom condition: SNode **subtype**, SNode **supertype**,
            - rule: SNode **subtype**, **SNode supertype**, ^^EquationInfo **equationInfo**^^, TypeCheckingContext **typeCheckingContext**, boolean **inequalityIsWeak**, boolean **inequalityIsLessThan**
        - substitute type rule: SNode **originalType**
    - Generator:
        - mapping configuration: CreateRootRuleContext **_context**
    - Editor:
        - General: SNode **myNode**

!!! question "How does the IDE collect generators to engage on a model?"

    Specific Languages Blog: [How MPS collects generators to engage on a model](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/how-mps-collects-generators-to-engage-on-a-model/)

!!! question "genplan (in devkit) vs. generator priorities?"

    The genplan is applied instead of the generator priorities. If your generator should be applied in a model using a genplan, your generator has to be part of the genplan.
    When developing a language, which is used within an aspect, e.g. typesystem, the MPS aspect's genplan can block the generator.

??? question "How can you use generated classes which implement an extension-point?"

    > Let $L_A$ be a language which offers an extension-point over class $E$. Then it is quite simple to provide a static implementation for extension-point for $E$ for example in another language. What if we have want map a concept $Q$ of $B$ to that extension-point? We want to be able to generated Code $C$ from a oncept instance of $Q$ which is a subclass of $E$, such that we can use it for the extension-point over class $E$.

    - Create the extension point in the plugin aspect of language $L_A$.

    ![extension point ModelMergeExt](extension_point_ModelMergeExt.png){width="600px"}

    - In generator main you need to create two root mapping rules for $Q$ (which is ModelMerge in our case).

    ![ModelMergeExt generator](ModelMergeExt_generator.png){width="600px"}

    - map_ModelMerge maps $Q$ to a class which extends $E$ (here `ConceptMergeSpec`).
    - map_ModelMerge_extension will generate an extension for $Q$. It is a extension RootMapping which can be selected from the intention. 

    ![ModelMergeExt root template](ModelMergeExt_root_template.png)
    
    The code for the Reference-Macro in the figure above should look like this.
    ![ModelMergeExt_reference_macro.png](ModelMergeExt_reference_macro.png)

    Make sure you have ^^jetbrains.mps.lang.extension^^ included as language in the plugin.

    - Now create a solution, not a sandbox. Set *Solution Kind* in the properties to *Other*. Afterwards create a model named *plugin* (not optional). Add an instance of $Q$ to your model plugin and build it. Looking now at your last transient model, there must be 3 artifacts related to $Q$:

    1.the generated class 
    2.the generated extension 
    3.an `ExtensionDescriptor` which provides all found extensions

    - Now you should be able to locate your extension with a code fragment like this:

    ```java
    foreach obj in extensionPoint/ModelMergeExt/.objects { 
    System.out.println("---> extension " + obj); 
    }
    ```

    {{ contribution_by('dbinkele') }}

!!! question "Where should you put classes that you need on the user side and in the generator?"

    Move the classes to a solution and add that solution as a runtime solution to the language (in the module properties).

!!! question "Can you access the output model in a property macro?"

    > In reference macros in generators, I can use the provided "outputNode" parameter as an entry point into the output model of the current transformation and e.g. use this to find the root node my generated reference will be contained in.
    > Can I do something similar in property macros? For those, there obviously is no "outputNode". I'd still like to find, for example, the Node in my output model that my generated property belongs to. Is there a way to do that?

    {{ question_by('jonaskraemer') }}

    You can try to use the *post-processing* function of a `$MAP_SRC$` macro.   

## How to generate XY

!!! question "What can be generated?"

    Have a look at the [language repository](https://confluence.jetbrains.com/display/MPS/MPS+Languages+Repository). You
    might also find other languages on GitHub. In general there doesn't have to be an existing language. Any text can be
    generated with TextGen or Plaintextgen from {{ mps_extensions() }}. It's also possible to generate code from an action or
    pre/post-processing script in the generator by using an existing Java library such as Apache Poi. A tutorial for example 
    for excel can be found [here](https://www.codejava.net/coding/how-to-write-excel-files-in-java-using-apache-poi).

!!! hint "I want to create multi outputs for a language.[^1]"

    Use a dummy concept or a generation plan with a fork. This quesion is also answered in [the generator cookbook](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/generator-cookbook.html#howtogeneratemultiplefilesperrootnode).

!!! question "How can you generate latex files?"

    The mbeddr documentation language can do this. Have a look at the [documentation](http://mbeddr.com/files/documentationdocumentation.pdf).

!!! question "How can you generate some text?"

    Use the textgen aspect or use [mps-plaintextgen](https://dslfoundry.com/plaintextgen-tutorial/) from {{ mps_extensions() }}.

!!! question "Can you use an alternative approach to generating code?"

    You can interpret your models instead. Use ^^mbeddr.mpsutil.interpreter^^ from {{ mbeddr_platform() }}.

!!! question "Should you use generation plans or generator priorities?"

    Have a look at the motivation for generation plans in the [official documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/generation-plan.html).
    Generation plans should be used when the generation order is simple.

!!! question "How do you generate language X from MPS?"

    Specific Languages blog: [How do I generate language XY from MPS?](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/how-do-i-generate-language-x-from-mps/)

??? question "How can you make sure that a generator B can use the output of a generator A?"

    1. Define priorities or a fixed genplan for $B$ (and maybe $A$)
    2. If you can't run / don't want to run both generators in the same “phase”, configure them to run one after each other.

    Solution **1**:

    - Define a $MM$ (structure) (INFO-NODE) in $A$ where you accumulate all required information and pass for all other generators.
    - Configure $A$ to remove INFO-NODE if not required (separate mapping configuration).

    Solution **2**:

    - Define an annotation and store all req. infos there
    - Configure $A$ to drop annotation if not required (separate mapping configuration),

    Solution **3**:

    - Use user objects to store required information as part of the real AST nodes.
    - User objects are volatile children/properties which are not persisted but survive several generation phases. Use ^^com.mbeddr.mpsutil.genutil^^ to achieve this.

    Solution **4**:
    
    - Define a fixed genplan with checkpoints.
    - Organize the whole generation process manually.

??? question "How to generate large strings?"

    > Given I am writing a generator and it generates a java string for a string property.
    > That property holds a string of more than 64000 characters and the java compiler gives me a *constant string too long* error.
    > What can I do?

    > This is how it looks like so far:

    > ![long string property macro](long_string_property_macro.png){width="600px"}

    **Option 1**: Extract into a separate file

    Of course it would be better to not fill the java file too much and instead generate the string into a file that gets loaded at this place.

    **Option 2**: Split and join again

    The restriction only applies to the size of string literals. However, at runtime, it is allowed to have larger strings. So that we can split it into a concatenation that gets assembled at runtime then:

    * Here we use the [Guiva](https://github.com/google/guava) classes [Joiner](https://github.com/google/guava) and [Splitter](https://github.com/google/guava) from `MPS.Core/google.common.base` and `java.util.Arrays`.
    * We use the splitter at generation time to split it into parts of maximal 50000 characters.
    * Then we map it onto an arbitrary node that has a string property, as `$LOOP$` requires a node
    * In the property macro inside the loop, we simply pull that property out of the node again (the inspector of this is not visible in the screenshot)
    * It is just a coincidence that we create nodes of the same concept and use the same property for the loop content, than for the outside context node. You may light-quote anything of type string here.

    ![long string improved macro](long_string_improved_macro.png)

    {{ contribution_by('abstraktor') }}

## Open API

!!! question "How can you preview the generated text programmatically?"

    Use the MPS action [TextPreviewModel](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Acfccec82-df72-4483-9807-88776b4673ab%28jetbrains.mps.ide.make.actions%29%2F8610665572788515769) or call the methods in [TextGeneratorEngine](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=6ed54515-acc8-4d1e-a16c-9fd6cfe951ea%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.text%28MPS.Core%2F%29%2F%7ETextGeneratorEngine) if you want to use the text generator.

!!! question "How do you get the output path for a solution?"

    - To get an {{ mps_url("@mps.IFile") }}, call `#!java SModelOperations.getOutputLocation(model)`.
    - To get an string, call `#!java ProjectPathUtil.getGeneratorOutputPath(module.getModuleDescriptor())`. You have to first cast the module to an `AbstractModule.`

??? question "How can I check if a model requires generation programmatically?"

    > The project view shows `generation required` if a model has been changed.
    > What is the source of this information, and how reliable is it?

    > (regarding the 2nd part of the question: sometimes the text in the project view is not up to date, but pressing ++f5++ fixes it. Is it just the UI that is not updated when the underlying state changes, or is the state itself not updated properly until ++f5++ is pressed?)

    [ModelGenerationStatusManager](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=6ed54515-acc8-4d1e-a16c-9fd6cfe951ea%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.generator%28MPS.Core%2F%29%2F%7EModelGenerationStatusManager) provides a corresponding API. This is how to use it:

    ```java
    MPSProject project = /* ... */;
    SModel model = /* ... */;
    ModelGenerationStatusManager statusManager = project.getComponent(ModelGenerationStatusManager.class); 
    if (statusManager.generationRequired(model)) { /* ... */ } 
    ```
    
    Unfortunately, it does'nt seem to be reliable, e.g. when changing something in the model, the API behaves correctly in the first place. But after executing the *Synchronize* action, MPS for some reason believes that generation is not required any more (even though the change would have an effect on the output and *Synchronize* doesn't execute the generation). This odd behavior can also be seen in the project view (note: this might be outdated information).

    {{ contribution_by('till-f') }}

## Troubleshooting

!!! warning "MPS can't resolve the import XY.[^3]"

    The solution that contains the class has to be added as a runtime solution (see [here](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/360004217260/comments/360000621000)).

!!! warning "Why are root nodes generated more than once?"

    Have you used one of your root nodes as a child of another node? It will still act as a root node in this case.

!!! warning "No output location for XY."

    Make sure that the Java facet is enabled in the properties of the language or solution. This error can often be seen when opening an old MPS project.


!!! question "How do I debug generators?"
    
    Specific Languages Blog: [Debugging generators](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/debugging-generators/)

!!! warning "The generated code has no debug symbols."

    Locate the build solution in MPS that is building your languages and adjust the java settings:
    
        java options <project default> 
          generate debug info false 
          generate no warnings false 
          fork false 
          compiler <default compiler> 
          java compliance level 1.8 
          java compiler options <no additional options> 
          copy resources false 
    
    Then set *generate debug info* to true.
    
    If no java options exist in your build solution, simply add one in the project structure.

??? question "How can you debug the differences of generation between command line and MPS?"

    > Given I have an MPS project and it compiles well in my MPS.
    > When I run the same in a command line then I see a compile error.
    > How can I debug this?

    The issue behind this kind of issues usually lies in one of these three things:

    **Issue Area 1**: Settings (inplace, threading)
    
    Try turning off *Apply transformations in place* in your MPS settings under *Build, Execution, Deployment* --> *Generator* --> *General*, as this is unset in the command line (note, that this setting doesn't appear in the search):
    
    ![generator settings](generator_settings.png){width="600px"}
    
    Also, disabling the build in parallel threads may help.
    
    **Issue Area 2**: Dependencies
    
    A second issue may originate from the separate type of class loading and dependency loading in the command line.
    
    **Issue Area 3**: Generation plans
    
    The command line build runs the generator plans that are included in the devkits of a model, or that are explicitly added to the _generator_ facet+tab of a module. If your code starts the build for an explicit generation plan other than that, consider if a different plan could be the culprit. (Remember, right-clicking a model and *Show Generation Plan* to see if all looks as expected).

    Remark 1: Inplace transformations are on or off depending on your build script, same applied to parallel generation. On the command line if nothing specified it defaults to 4 threads. The biggest difference is that in the command line build not project is opened, which means anything that tried to access the project including virtual files will fail.

    Remark 2: One potential source of problems could be packaging of languages and generators. Because in the command line build generators might need to be loaded from packaged jars, any issues with that packaging could affect the generation. For example, as it currently may happen due to MPS-32026 that whole generator models with templates are not loaded and therefore not applied during the generation in the command line.

    {{ contribution_by('abstraktor') }}

[^1]:[MPS forum - I want to export multiple languages from MPS](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/4406708701458-i-want-export-multi-language-from-mps)
[^2]:[MPS forum - Is it possible to export a DSL compiler created with MPS and use it independently](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/360008125300-Is-it-possible-to-export-a-DSL-compiler-created-with-MPS-and-use-it-independently-e-g-invoke-it-from-another-java-program-)
[^3]:[MPS forum - Generator error: uncaught exception ?no classifier?](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/360004217260-Generator-error-uncaught-exception-no-classifier-)

Commit message:

Add question about generation plan order

src/doc/docs/aspects/generator.md, after:

---
title: Generator aspect
---

# Generator aspect

> Generator is a part of language specification that defines the denotational semantics for the concepts in the language.
>
> — <cite>MPS documentation</cite>

## General

!!! question "Are there any best practices for generators?"

    - [coolya: Maintainable MPS Generators](https://coolya.github.io/maintainable-generators/)

!!! question "Can you invoke the generator from an external tool?[^2]"

    Yes, it can be run from Ant.

!!! question "How can you copy the output to another location?"

    Use the [@CopyOutcome](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A4d7d5410-8d5a-45f2-a2f2-a6b7b42a377e%28jetbrains.mps.lang.makeup.structure%29%2F12232831069847415239) annotation.

!!! question "How do I obtain a temporary model?"

    Use the class [TemporaryModels](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=6ed54515-acc8-4d1e-a16c-9fd6cfe951ea%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.smodel.tempmodel%28MPS.Core%2F%29%2F%7ETemporaryModels).

??? question "Which variable names aren't available because they are used in the generator?"

    ^^Underlined^^ variables are specific variables that are available.

    - Console: ConsoleContext **context**, ConsoleStream **console**
    - Constraint:
        - Scope: ReferenceConstraintsContext **_context**
    - Typesystem:
        - all rules: IsApplicable2Status **status**, TypeCheckingContext **typeCheckingContext**
        - comparison rule: SNode **node1**, SNode **node2**, 
        - inequation replacement rule
            - custom condition: SNode **subtype**, SNode **supertype**,
            - rule: SNode **subtype**, **SNode supertype**, ^^EquationInfo **equationInfo**^^, TypeCheckingContext **typeCheckingContext**, boolean **inequalityIsWeak**, boolean **inequalityIsLessThan**
        - substitute type rule: SNode **originalType**
    - Generator:
        - mapping configuration: CreateRootRuleContext **_context**
    - Editor:
        - General: SNode **myNode**

!!! question "How does the IDE collect generators to engage on a model?"

    Specific Languages Blog: [How MPS collects generators to engage on a model](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/how-mps-collects-generators-to-engage-on-a-model/)

!!! question "genplan (in devkit) vs. generator priorities?"

    The genplan is applied instead of the generator priorities. If your generator should be applied in a model using a genplan, your generator has to be part of the genplan.
    When developing a language, which is used within an aspect, e.g. typesystem, the MPS aspect's genplan can block the generator.

??? question "How can you use generated classes which implement an extension-point?"

    > Let $L_A$ be a language which offers an extension-point over class $E$. Then it is quite simple to provide a static implementation for extension-point for $E$ for example in another language. What if we have want map a concept $Q$ of $B$ to that extension-point? We want to be able to generated Code $C$ from a oncept instance of $Q$ which is a subclass of $E$, such that we can use it for the extension-point over class $E$.

    - Create the extension point in the plugin aspect of language $L_A$.

    ![extension point ModelMergeExt](extension_point_ModelMergeExt.png){width="600px"}

    - In generator main you need to create two root mapping rules for $Q$ (which is ModelMerge in our case).

    ![ModelMergeExt generator](ModelMergeExt_generator.png){width="600px"}

    - map_ModelMerge maps $Q$ to a class which extends $E$ (here `ConceptMergeSpec`).
    - map_ModelMerge_extension will generate an extension for $Q$. It is a extension RootMapping which can be selected from the intention. 

    ![ModelMergeExt root template](ModelMergeExt_root_template.png)
    
    The code for the Reference-Macro in the figure above should look like this.
    ![ModelMergeExt_reference_macro.png](ModelMergeExt_reference_macro.png)

    Make sure you have ^^jetbrains.mps.lang.extension^^ included as language in the plugin.

    - Now create a solution, not a sandbox. Set *Solution Kind* in the properties to *Other*. Afterwards create a model named *plugin* (not optional). Add an instance of $Q$ to your model plugin and build it. Looking now at your last transient model, there must be 3 artifacts related to $Q$:

    1.the generated class 
    2.the generated extension 
    3.an `ExtensionDescriptor` which provides all found extensions

    - Now you should be able to locate your extension with a code fragment like this:

    ```java
    foreach obj in extensionPoint/ModelMergeExt/.objects { 
    System.out.println("---> extension " + obj); 
    }
    ```

    {{ contribution_by('dbinkele') }}

!!! question "Where should you put classes that you need on the user side and in the generator?"

    Move the classes to a solution and add that solution as a runtime solution to the language (in the module properties).

!!! question "Can you access the output model in a property macro?"

    > In reference macros in generators, I can use the provided "outputNode" parameter as an entry point into the output model of the current transformation and e.g. use this to find the root node my generated reference will be contained in.
    > Can I do something similar in property macros? For those, there obviously is no "outputNode". I'd still like to find, for example, the Node in my output model that my generated property belongs to. Is there a way to do that?

    {{ question_by('jonaskraemer') }}

    You can try to use the *post-processing* function of a `$MAP_SRC$` macro.   

!!! question "Which generation plan is used: the one of the custom generation facet or from any of the used devkits?"

    - Custom generation facet: if there is a GP defined, this plan is used.
    - Devkits: first, MPS looks if any devkit specifies a GP. The first devKit with an associated plan is consulted, if any, and no further lookup is done.
      If there are no devkits with associated plans, MPS checks the facets of the devkit modules if any is an GP provider.
      The first found facet serves as a provider.

## How to generate XY

!!! question "What can be generated?"

    Have a look at the [language repository](https://confluence.jetbrains.com/display/MPS/MPS+Languages+Repository). You
    might also find other languages on GitHub. In general there doesn't have to be an existing language. Any text can be
    generated with TextGen or Plaintextgen from {{ mps_extensions() }}. It's also possible to generate code from an action or
    pre/post-processing script in the generator by using an existing Java library such as Apache Poi. A tutorial for example 
    for excel can be found [here](https://www.codejava.net/coding/how-to-write-excel-files-in-java-using-apache-poi).

!!! hint "I want to create multi outputs for a language.[^1]"

    Use a dummy concept or a generation plan with a fork. This quesion is also answered in [the generator cookbook](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/generator-cookbook.html#howtogeneratemultiplefilesperrootnode).

!!! question "How can you generate latex files?"

    The mbeddr documentation language can do this. Have a look at the [documentation](http://mbeddr.com/files/documentationdocumentation.pdf).

!!! question "How can you generate some text?"

    Use the textgen aspect or use [mps-plaintextgen](https://dslfoundry.com/plaintextgen-tutorial/) from {{ mps_extensions() }}.

!!! question "Can you use an alternative approach to generating code?"

    You can interpret your models instead. Use ^^mbeddr.mpsutil.interpreter^^ from {{ mbeddr_platform() }}.

!!! question "Should you use generation plans or generator priorities?"

    Have a look at the motivation for generation plans in the [official documentation](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/generation-plan.html).
    Generation plans should be used when the generation order is simple.

!!! question "How do you generate language X from MPS?"

    Specific Languages blog: [How do I generate language XY from MPS?](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/how-do-i-generate-language-x-from-mps/)

??? question "How can you make sure that a generator B can use the output of a generator A?"

    1. Define priorities or a fixed genplan for $B$ (and maybe $A$)
    2. If you can't run / don't want to run both generators in the same “phase”, configure them to run one after each other.

    Solution **1**:

    - Define a $MM$ (structure) (INFO-NODE) in $A$ where you accumulate all required information and pass for all other generators.
    - Configure $A$ to remove INFO-NODE if not required (separate mapping configuration).

    Solution **2**:

    - Define an annotation and store all req. infos there
    - Configure $A$ to drop annotation if not required (separate mapping configuration),

    Solution **3**:

    - Use user objects to store required information as part of the real AST nodes.
    - User objects are volatile children/properties which are not persisted but survive several generation phases. Use ^^com.mbeddr.mpsutil.genutil^^ to achieve this.

    Solution **4**:
    
    - Define a fixed genplan with checkpoints.
    - Organize the whole generation process manually.

??? question "How to generate large strings?"

    > Given I am writing a generator and it generates a java string for a string property.
    > That property holds a string of more than 64000 characters and the java compiler gives me a *constant string too long* error.
    > What can I do?

    > This is how it looks like so far:

    > ![long string property macro](long_string_property_macro.png){width="600px"}

    **Option 1**: Extract into a separate file

    Of course it would be better to not fill the java file too much and instead generate the string into a file that gets loaded at this place.

    **Option 2**: Split and join again

    The restriction only applies to the size of string literals. However, at runtime, it is allowed to have larger strings. So that we can split it into a concatenation that gets assembled at runtime then:

    * Here we use the [Guiva](https://github.com/google/guava) classes [Joiner](https://github.com/google/guava) and [Splitter](https://github.com/google/guava) from `MPS.Core/google.common.base` and `java.util.Arrays`.
    * We use the splitter at generation time to split it into parts of maximal 50000 characters.
    * Then we map it onto an arbitrary node that has a string property, as `$LOOP$` requires a node
    * In the property macro inside the loop, we simply pull that property out of the node again (the inspector of this is not visible in the screenshot)
    * It is just a coincidence that we create nodes of the same concept and use the same property for the loop content, than for the outside context node. You may light-quote anything of type string here.

    ![long string improved macro](long_string_improved_macro.png)

    {{ contribution_by('abstraktor') }}

## Open API

!!! question "How can you preview the generated text programmatically?"

    Use the MPS action [TextPreviewModel](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Acfccec82-df72-4483-9807-88776b4673ab%28jetbrains.mps.ide.make.actions%29%2F8610665572788515769) or call the methods in [TextGeneratorEngine](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=6ed54515-acc8-4d1e-a16c-9fd6cfe951ea%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.text%28MPS.Core%2F%29%2F%7ETextGeneratorEngine) if you want to use the text generator.

!!! question "How do you get the output path for a solution?"

    - To get an {{ mps_url("@mps.IFile") }}, call `#!java SModelOperations.getOutputLocation(model)`.
    - To get an string, call `#!java ProjectPathUtil.getGeneratorOutputPath(module.getModuleDescriptor())`. You have to first cast the module to an `AbstractModule.`

??? question "How can I check if a model requires generation programmatically?"

    > The project view shows `generation required` if a model has been changed.
    > What is the source of this information, and how reliable is it?

    > (regarding the 2nd part of the question: sometimes the text in the project view is not up to date, but pressing ++f5++ fixes it. Is it just the UI that is not updated when the underlying state changes, or is the state itself not updated properly until ++f5++ is pressed?)

    [ModelGenerationStatusManager](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=6ed54515-acc8-4d1e-a16c-9fd6cfe951ea%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.generator%28MPS.Core%2F%29%2F%7EModelGenerationStatusManager) provides a corresponding API. This is how to use it:

    ```java
    MPSProject project = /* ... */;
    SModel model = /* ... */;
    ModelGenerationStatusManager statusManager = project.getComponent(ModelGenerationStatusManager.class); 
    if (statusManager.generationRequired(model)) { /* ... */ } 
    ```
    
    Unfortunately, it does'nt seem to be reliable, e.g. when changing something in the model, the API behaves correctly in the first place. But after executing the *Synchronize* action, MPS for some reason believes that generation is not required any more (even though the change would have an effect on the output and *Synchronize* doesn't execute the generation). This odd behavior can also be seen in the project view (note: this might be outdated information).

    {{ contribution_by('till-f') }}

## Troubleshooting

!!! warning "MPS can't resolve the import XY.[^3]"

    The solution that contains the class has to be added as a runtime solution (see [here](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/360004217260/comments/360000621000)).

!!! warning "Why are root nodes generated more than once?"

    Have you used one of your root nodes as a child of another node? It will still act as a root node in this case.

!!! warning "No output location for XY."

    Make sure that the Java facet is enabled in the properties of the language or solution. This error can often be seen when opening an old MPS project.


!!! question "How do I debug generators?"
    
    Specific Languages Blog: [Debugging generators](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/debugging-generators/)

!!! warning "The generated code has no debug symbols."

    Locate the build solution in MPS that is building your languages and adjust the java settings:
    
        java options <project default> 
          generate debug info false 
          generate no warnings false 
          fork false 
          compiler <default compiler> 
          java compliance level 1.8 
          java compiler options <no additional options> 
          copy resources false 
    
    Then set *generate debug info* to true.
    
    If no java options exist in your build solution, simply add one in the project structure.

??? question "How can you debug the differences of generation between command line and MPS?"

    > Given I have an MPS project and it compiles well in my MPS.
    > When I run the same in a command line then I see a compile error.
    > How can I debug this?

    The issue behind this kind of issues usually lies in one of these three things:

    **Issue Area 1**: Settings (inplace, threading)
    
    Try turning off *Apply transformations in place* in your MPS settings under *Build, Execution, Deployment* --> *Generator* --> *General*, as this is unset in the command line (note, that this setting doesn't appear in the search):
    
    ![generator settings](generator_settings.png){width="600px"}
    
    Also, disabling the build in parallel threads may help.
    
    **Issue Area 2**: Dependencies
    
    A second issue may originate from the separate type of class loading and dependency loading in the command line.
    
    **Issue Area 3**: Generation plans
    
    The command line build runs the generator plans that are included in the devkits of a model, or that are explicitly added to the _generator_ facet+tab of a module. If your code starts the build for an explicit generation plan other than that, consider if a different plan could be the culprit. (Remember, right-clicking a model and *Show Generation Plan* to see if all looks as expected).

    Remark 1: Inplace transformations are on or off depending on your build script, same applied to parallel generation. On the command line if nothing specified it defaults to 4 threads. The biggest difference is that in the command line build not project is opened, which means anything that tried to access the project including virtual files will fail.

    Remark 2: One potential source of problems could be packaging of languages and generators. Because in the command line build generators might need to be loaded from packaged jars, any issues with that packaging could affect the generation. For example, as it currently may happen due to MPS-32026 that whole generator models with templates are not loaded and therefore not applied during the generation in the command line.

    {{ contribution_by('abstraktor') }}

[^1]:[MPS forum - I want to export multiple languages from MPS](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/4406708701458-i-want-export-multi-language-from-mps)
[^2]:[MPS forum - Is it possible to export a DSL compiler created with MPS and use it independently](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/360008125300-Is-it-possible-to-export-a-DSL-compiler-created-with-MPS-and-use-it-independently-e-g-invoke-it-from-another-java-program-)
[^3]:[MPS forum - Generator error: uncaught exception ?no classifier?](https://mps-support.jetbrains.com/hc/en-us/community/posts/360004217260-Generator-error-uncaught-exception-no-classifier-)
