src/doc/docs/aspects/refactorings.md, before:

---
title: Refactorings Aspect
hide:
- toc
tags:
- aspect
---

# [Refactorings Aspect](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/mps-refactoring.html)

> You can write simple refactorings using the language ^^jetbrains.mps.lang.refactoring^^.
>
> — <cite>MPS documentation</cite>

!!! question "Is this aspect widely used?"

    No, there are just a few use cases, even in MPS languages.

!!! question "Can you link to an example that demonstrates this aspect?"

    [Rename](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Ad9efd362-28b8-4f70-9bcd-fb582528d11c%28jetbrains.mps.lang.core.refactorings%29%2F1347577327951770664) implements the refactoring.
    [RenameNode](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F8784230320738943353) implements the action.
    The action is part of the group [CoreNodeRefactorings](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F8784230320738943351) which belongs to the
    [NodeRefactoring](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Ade82dfab-9448-49ba-813e-2b0579f7fb15%28jetbrains.mps.ide.platform.actions%29%2F6714826334259354054) group. Base Language has its group called [RefactoringAdditions](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Adfc27cab-2d08-4c79-ac99-e95209e18392%28jetbrains.mps.baseLanguage.pluginSolution.plugin%29%2F225095413451945663).

!!! question "Can you change the concept of a node while keeping all properties, references, and children?"

    Yes, call [RefactoringRuntime.replaceWithNewConcept](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=528ff3b9-5fc4-40dd-931f-c6ce3650640e%2Fr%3Af69c3fa1-0e30-4980-84e2-190ae44e4c3d%28jetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime%2Fjetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime.base%29%2F7217668918201205170) with your node and new concept as parameters. 
    In this class, there are other handy methods, such as [changePropertyInstance(node, oldProp, newProp)](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=528ff3b9-5fc4-40dd-931f-c6ce3650640e%2Fr%3Af69c3fa1-0e30-4980-84e2-190ae44e4c3d%28jetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime%2Fjetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime.base%29%2F4853505765035392526) and [changeReferenceLinkInstances(node, oldLink, newLink)](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=528ff3b9-5fc4-40dd-931f-c6ce3650640e%2Fr%3Af69c3fa1-0e30-4980-84e2-190ae44e4c3d%28jetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime%2Fjetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime.base%29%2F4853505765035354594).
    
    [Changing the concept of a node](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-01/20-changing-node-concept/){{ blog('sl') }}

!!! question "What should I put in the applicable block of the refactoring and its action?"

    For the action, you can use `is applicable refactoring<YourRefactoring>()`. By default, refactorings are not disabled for read-only
    editors. Consult the [update block](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F8451255343455518243) of the [MoveNodes](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F830211401282058525) action for more information.

Commit message:

Add some more information + extend documentation aspect documentation.

src/doc/docs/aspects/refactorings.md, after:

---
title: Refactorings Aspect
hide:
- toc
tags:
- aspect
---

# [Refactorings Aspect](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/mps-refactoring.html)

> You can write simple refactorings using the language ^^jetbrains.mps.lang.refactoring^^.
>
> — <cite>MPS documentation</cite>

The following questions are related to the old refactoring declarations. Use refactoring participants instead. They
are explained in the documentation.

!!! question "Is this aspect widely used?"

    No, there are just a few use cases, even in MPS languages.

!!! question "Can you link to an example that demonstrates this aspect?"

    [Rename](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Ad9efd362-28b8-4f70-9bcd-fb582528d11c%28jetbrains.mps.lang.core.refactorings%29%2F1347577327951770664) implements the refactoring.
    [RenameNode](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F8784230320738943353) implements the action.
    The action is part of the group [CoreNodeRefactorings](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F8784230320738943351) which belongs to the
    [NodeRefactoring](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Ade82dfab-9448-49ba-813e-2b0579f7fb15%28jetbrains.mps.ide.platform.actions%29%2F6714826334259354054) group. Base Language has its group called [RefactoringAdditions](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Adfc27cab-2d08-4c79-ac99-e95209e18392%28jetbrains.mps.baseLanguage.pluginSolution.plugin%29%2F225095413451945663).

!!! question "Can you change the concept of a node while keeping all properties, references, and children?"

    Yes, call [RefactoringRuntime.replaceWithNewConcept](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=528ff3b9-5fc4-40dd-931f-c6ce3650640e%2Fr%3Af69c3fa1-0e30-4980-84e2-190ae44e4c3d%28jetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime%2Fjetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime.base%29%2F7217668918201205170) with your node and new concept as parameters. 
    In this class, there are other handy methods, such as [changePropertyInstance(node, oldProp, newProp)](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=528ff3b9-5fc4-40dd-931f-c6ce3650640e%2Fr%3Af69c3fa1-0e30-4980-84e2-190ae44e4c3d%28jetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime%2Fjetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime.base%29%2F4853505765035392526) and [changeReferenceLinkInstances(node, oldLink, newLink)](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=528ff3b9-5fc4-40dd-931f-c6ce3650640e%2Fr%3Af69c3fa1-0e30-4980-84e2-190ae44e4c3d%28jetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime%2Fjetbrains.mps.lang.migration.runtime.base%29%2F4853505765035354594).
    
    [Changing the concept of a node](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-01/20-changing-node-concept/){{ blog('sl') }}

!!! question "What should I put in the applicable block of the refactoring and its action?"

    For the action, you can use `is applicable refactoring<YourRefactoring>()`. By default, refactorings are not disabled for read-only
    editors. Consult the [update block](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F8451255343455518243) of the [MoveNodes](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A97d6b60a-b381-42e8-9ea4-402ec93eaf11%28jetbrains.mps.ide.refactoring.plugin%29%2F830211401282058525) action for more information.
