src/doc/docs/languages/kernelf.md, before:

Please start with the [readme file](https://github.com/IETS3/iets3.opensource) of the [iets3.opensource](https://github.com/IETS3/iets3.opensource)
repository. The main documentation is the book [DESIGN, EVOLUTION AND USE
ofKernelF](http://voelter.de/data/books/kernelf-designEvoUse.pdf) by Markus Voelter. There's also a [short reference](http://voelter.de/data/pub/kernelf-reference.pdf) with only 27 pages.

## Language implementations

- [Unpacking Options Values: A Case Study in Language Design](https://languageengineering.io/unpacking-options-values-a-case-study-in-language-design-3f67c0a9696f)
- [The Evolution of Decision Tables](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-evolution-of-decision-tables-80ce77bf984c)

Multi-Party boolean decision table:

- [A Smart Contract Development Stack](https://languageengineering.io/a-smart-contract-development-stack-54533a3a503a)
- [A Smart Contract Development Stack, Part II: Game Theoretical Aspects](https://languageengineering.io/a-smart-contract-development-stack-part-ii-game-theoretical-aspects-ca7a9d2e548d)

## Mutable state

- [Dealing with Mutable State in KernelF](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/dealing-with-mutable-state-in-kernelf-e0fdec8a489b)

## Functional programming

- [Some Concepts in Functional Languages](https://languageengineering.io/some-concepts-in-functional-languages-550c683a0ffa)(languageengineering.io)
- [Introduction to the functional programming jargon (general)](https://github.com/hemanth/functional-programming-jargon)
- [Awesome functional programming (general)](https://github.com/lucasviola/awesome-functional-programming)
- [Funclerative Programming](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/funclerative-programming-968cc53ee580)(Markus Voelter)

Commit message:

Move tracing + nix handling to kernelF page

src/doc/docs/languages/kernelf.md, after:

Please start with the [readme file](https://github.com/IETS3/iets3.opensource) of the [iets3.opensource](https://github.com/IETS3/iets3.opensource)
repository. The main documentation is the book [DESIGN, EVOLUTION AND USE
of KernelF](http://voelter.de/data/books/kernelf-designEvoUse.pdf) by Markus Voelter. There's also a [short reference](http://voelter.de/data/pub/kernelf-reference.pdf) with only 27 pages.

## Language implementations

- [Unpacking Options Values: A Case Study in Language Design](https://languageengineering.io/unpacking-options-values-a-case-study-in-language-design-3f67c0a9696f)
- [The Evolution of Decision Tables](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-evolution-of-decision-tables-80ce77bf984c)

Multi-Party boolean decision table:

- [A Smart Contract Development Stack](https://languageengineering.io/a-smart-contract-development-stack-54533a3a503a)
- [A Smart Contract Development Stack, Part II: Game Theoretical Aspects](https://languageengineering.io/a-smart-contract-development-stack-part-ii-game-theoretical-aspects-ca7a9d2e548d)

## Mutable state

- [Dealing with Mutable State in KernelF](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/dealing-with-mutable-state-in-kernelf-e0fdec8a489b)

## Functional programming

- [Some Concepts in Functional Languages](https://languageengineering.io/some-concepts-in-functional-languages-550c683a0ffa)(languageengineering.io)
- [Introduction to the functional programming jargon (general)](https://github.com/hemanth/functional-programming-jargon)
- [Awesome functional programming (general)](https://github.com/lucasviola/awesome-functional-programming)
- [Funclerative Programming](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/funclerative-programming-968cc53ee580)(Markus Voelter)

## Tracing

To follow the executing of an interpreter, the execution trace is helpful. Right-click an interpreted node and click *Show Trace*. The Trace explorer now opens in the lower left corner. When you click onww of the lines in the trace explorer, the node in the editor gets replaced by the trace. The trace can be manipulated through the *trace expression*.

![trace tool](trace_tool.gif)

## Nix

KernelF doesn't allow returning null values
(intermediate null values that are caught by the same or other evaluators are fine).
Instead it supports so called nix handlers (there's an [nixHandler extension point](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A6c6155f0-4bbe-4af5-8c26-244d570e21e4%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.plugin%29%2F2417394483934994140)). The default handler for KernelF is [DefaultNixHandler](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A6c6155f0-4bbe-4af5-8c26-244d570e21e4%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.plugin%29%2F2417394483935015244).
A nix value (interface [INixValue](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A5db517a0-f62d-4841-a421-11bb7269799d%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.shared.runtime%29%2F3889855429449824409)) repesents an empty (nothing) value. There is, for example, a [DefaultNix](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Aac28053f-2041-47f6-806b-ecfaca05a64a%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.runtime.runtime%29%2F3889855429449859911) class, for dates there's [EmptyDateRangeValue](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Aa9ac3767-b241-4aa4-a973-d04bb5ce184c%28org.iets3.core.expr.datetime.runtime%29%2F5551088970758352208). The handler has a method *process* that can be used to handle values that might be nix. To use this feature. To use this feature call `new NixSupport(Object value node<> node {NixSupport => Object} calculator).run()` where the calculator returns the value:

![examples: nix support](nix_support_examples.png)
