---
tags:
- infrastructure
---
This page describes the *build* folder of the different platforms that is located in the root folder of the corresponding project. The folder contains files that are checked into Git such as Gradle files as well as generated Ant build files and other temporary files.

Some folders that are described in the IETS3 section, are located at the root level in the other repository. The are also described
because they belong to the build process.

## {{ mps_extensions() }}

- The *generated* folder contains the generated build scripts such as the scripts for building the languages and tests.
- The *mps* folder contains the MPS installation. The task [resolveMps](https://github.com/JetBrains/MPS-extensions/blob/master/build.gradle#L159)
resolves the MPS dependency from the *mps* configuration and copies it to this folder which also serves as the *mpsHomeDir*.

## {{ mbeddr() }}

- The *com.mbeddr.allScripts* contains the generated ant script that includes all other build scripts. It is checked into version control.
- The *com.mbeddr.analyses.cbmc* folder contains old shell scripts for building [CBMC](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc) on Window, MacOS, and Linux.
- The *com.mbeddr.release* folder contains a shell script for publishing mbeddr on GitHub.
- The *com.mbeddr* folder contains the general build script (*build.gradle*) as well as all the build script for all subprojects.
- The *publishing* folder contains a Gradle script for publishing mbeddr.
- The *thirdparty* folder contains build scripts for third party tools used by mbeddr (only [Graphviz](https://graphviz.org/) at the moment).
- The *com.mbeddr.x* folders contain the generated build scripts for building the languages and tests.

## {{ iets3() }}

- The *artifacts* folder contains the generated files of the ant scripts. This includes the compiled MPS plugins as well as the
build all script and the plugin for the tests.
- The *config* folder contains nothing except an empty ssl folder (TODO: where does this folder come from?)
- The *dependencies* folder contains the downloaded dependencies of the project. In this case, it contains the mbeddr platform + MPS-extensions.
- The *distributions* folder contains the generated artifacts of the languages and tests as zip folders.
- The *junitreport* folder contains the results of the test execution as an HTML report (*index.html*).
- See: *mps* folder in MPS-extensions.
- The *scripts* folder contains the ant scripts that where generated from the MPS build language. (TODO: why is there a nested build folder?)
- The *system* folder is the temporary [system directory](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/mps/directories-used-by-the-ide-to-store-settings-caches-plugins-and-logs.html#system-directory) for the test execution.
- The *tmp* folder contains temporary files generated by the Java compiler.
- The *jbrDownload* folder contains the downloaded JBR version is used for the build.The [downloadJbr](https://github.com/mbeddr/mps-gradle-plugin#download-jetbrains-runtime) Gradle task
comes from the [mps-gradle-plugin](https://github.com/mbeddr/mps-gradle-plugin).