src/doc/docs/platform_essentials/common_concepts_and_interfaces.md, before:

---
tags:
- mps_extensions
- mbeddr
- iets3
---

This list explains some common abstract concepts and interfaces that you can use to extend or utilize the functionality of the platforms.
Identifiers starting with a capital "I" refer to interfaces.

## Mbeddr

### Base

#### [Assessment](http://mbeddr.com/userguide/UserGuideExport.html#sid3231021218602645814)

To extend assessments, extend the class [AssessmentQuery](AssessmentQuery) to create a new query. The result of the query has to extend the class [AssessmentResult](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F865293814733133833). Extend the interface [AssessmentSummary](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F671216505796427448) to provide a summary of the results.

Example:

![example for an assessment query: interpreter coverage](example_interpreter_coverage.png)


#### Chunk

A node of the class [Chunk](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F7139820346881560230) has several properties: it has a name, acts as a scope provider for elements, and can import other elements or vice versa. It also integrates with the tree view and provides a graph of all the chunk hierarchy, including imports. It also detects dependency cycles.

Example:

![example: simple library with an import](example_library.png)

#### ICommentable

You can comment out concepts or interfaces that implement [ICommentable](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F7024921229556133800) by typing `//` or `/*` in the editor if the node doesn't implement [IEmpty](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F1049346859912912067).

#### IDocumentable

Add support for documenting nodes when implementing the [IDocumentable](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F3857533489766146432) interface. The text node uses the language `de.slisson.mps.richtext` and supported text and embedded nodes.

#### ITreeViewable

Implement [ITreeViewRoot](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F176285146686936640) to use the Tree tool. It is a tool that can show a tree structure.

Example: IETS3 call tree of functions

![iets3 call tree of functions](iets3_calltree.png)

#### IContainerOfUniqueNames

[IContainerOfUniqueNames](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F5095889050031055796) checks that the provided names are indeed unique and shows an error otherwise. For qualified names, implement the interface [IHasQualifiedName](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F5227231181399633032).

#### IDetectCycle

Implement [IDetectCycle](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F5939454523704167063) to detect cyclic dependencies. This feature is used, for example, with chunks that import other chunks.

#### IEmpty

Implement [IEmpty](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F1049346859912912067) to support empty lines. It automatically suppresses error messages, and the implementing concept is also not visible in the outline.

#### Name-Related Interfaces

Use [IIdentifierNamedConcept](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F7024921229555594291) for concepts that should have valid identifiers. Check the [property constraint](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A7a2f88d6-4108-4d29-b499-cc4de14ea970%28com.mbeddr.core.base.constraints%29%2F7024921229555594296) to understand how it works.

[INameAllUpperCase](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F8628579007224193612), [INameFirstCharLowerCase](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F8628579007224192794), and [INameFirstCharUpperCase](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F8628579007224193610) can further constrain the identifier name.

#### IMbeddrIDERoot

Concepts that implement the interface [IMbeddrIDERoot](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F13085436577882829) show up in the *New Roots* menu. It is visible above the regular *new* menu of the context menu. It adds the following features: a custom name for the menu entry, root concept sorting, and custom categories for the root concepts.

## IETS3

### General

#### ISolvable

Implement [ISolvable](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F5067755556171617239) to create solver tasks, executable by solvers such as [Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3). To enable the solver for a node, implement the interface [IUseSolver](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F9051170899708928820). A solver task must extend the concept [AbstractSolverTask](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F8571724170506775997). The concept that can be mapped to the solver must implement [ICanBeMappedToSolver](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F5553107600697040451).

#### ICanRunCheckManually

Implement [ICanRunCheckManually](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A657c9fde-2f36-4e61-ae17-20f02b8630ad%28org.iets3.core.base.structure%29%2F4450571177430728250) to support running checks that are executed through one of the actions (runAllManuallyOnModel, runAllManuallyOnRoot, runManuallyOnContainer) or intentions. User objects of the node can store the result of the checks. The interface also supports updating the editor with the test results, for example, highlighting the background of a test with color and refreshing the editor.

Example:

![KernelF: run check manually](run_check_manually.gif)


#### IOptionallyNamed

Use the interface [IOptionallyNamed](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A657c9fde-2f36-4e61-ae17-20f02b8630ad%28org.iets3.core.base.structure%29%2F229512757698888199) for concepts that should support an optional name. You can also use this name in smart references.

#### IValidNamedConcept

As an alternative to the mbeddr interfaces, you can use the interface [IValidNamedConcept](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A657c9fde-2f36-4e61-ae17-20f02b8630ad%28org.iets3.core.base.structure%29%2F229512757699383348) for valid identifiers that are valid in KernelF.


### Expressions

To add a new expression, extend the concept [Expression](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7425695345928347719). The new concept is commentable and documentable by default.

#### ICanBeLValue

Implement the interface [ICanBeLValue](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F195141004745586068) when the concept is valid as the [left value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(computer_science)?oldformat=true#Assignment:_l-values_and_r-values) of expressions such as assignments. Variable references, paths, and dot expressions can be left values.

#### IDotTarget

Implement [IDotTarget](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F9002563722476995146) to support custom operations for the dot expression. It can be used, for example, to add new operations for collections, enumerations, math, state machines, and many more.

#### IEmptyLiteral

[IEmptyLiteral](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F915344943735946072) is a marker interface used to mark literals that evaluate to an empty value at runtime.

#### ILiteral

Implement [ILiteral](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7782108600710395780) to add support for a new literal. For primitive types such as integers and strings, extend the concept [PrimitiveLiteral](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F8379605524044170035) instead. Register an extension for the [primitiveTypeMapper](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A6c6155f0-4bbe-4af5-8c26-244d570e21e4%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.plugin%29%2F1085994689350268573) extension point when using custom primitive literals. The standard implementation is the [SimpleTypesPrimitiveTypeMapper](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A5bf19129-2710-45a6-906e-9ee2d0977853%28org.iets3.core.expr.simpleTypes.plugin%29%2F3910975805742593968).

#### Effects

Since KernelF is by default immutable, some language extensions allow side effects, such as the language *org.iets3.core.expr.mutable*. To add custom concepts with effects, implement the interfaces [IMayAllowEffect](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F952298261448780116) and [IMayHaveEffect](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7791618349053901166).

#### IOptionallyTyped

Use the interface [IOptionallyTyped](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7089558164905593724) to add an optional type to an expression. The expression automatically used the provided type as its type.

#### ITraceRoot

Nodes that want to be the root of [[kernelf#tracing|tracing]] should implement the interface [ITraceRoot](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F8505972469205863874)

#### Custom Types

Custom types must extend the concept [Type](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7425695345928349204). If the type supports a default value (e.g., `false` for the boolean type and `0` for a numeric type), implement the interface [ITypeSupportsDefaultValue](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F6932772747669856399).

#### IWantNewLine

The concepts of expressions that need to be on a new line, such as try expressions, block expressions, and sometimes tables, must implement the interface [IWantNewLine](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F1134276681297127890). This interface affects the layout of some expressions, such as if-expressions and function bodies.

#### Tests

To add a new test statement, extend the concept [AbstractTestItem](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Aba7faab6-2b80-43d5-8b95-0c440665312c%28org.iets3.core.expr.tests.structure%29%2F8219602584783477664). If you need to update the editor after execution of the test item, override the method [performAdditionalEditorUpdate](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A7961970e-5737-42e2-b144-9bef3ad8d077%28org.iets3.core.expr.tests.behavior%29%2F4314247060317840957).

### Top-level

#### IToplevelExprContent

Implement the interface [IToplevelExprContent](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Ada65683e-ff6f-430d-ab68-32a77df72c93%28org.iets3.core.expr.toplevel.structure%29%2F2861782275883475449) to make expression available at the topmost level, like the [ExpressionStatement](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A00000000-0000-4000-0000-011c895902ca%28jetbrains.mps.baseLanguage.structure%29%2F1068580123155) in Base Language.

### Collections

When implementing custom operations for collections such as maps, lists, and sets, use one of the provided concepts as the base concept (for example [NoArgCollectionOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7554398283339795488) and [OneArgCollectionOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7554398283340020764)). If no suitable concept is available, implement one of the interfaces, such as [ICollectionOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7554398283339790458) and [IMapOneArgOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7757419675865128281). If this is still not possible, you can still implement [IDotTarget](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F9002563722476995146) directly.

## MPS-Extensions

### Richtext

#### IWord

Implement [IWord](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Aca2ab6bb-f6e7-4c0f-a88c-b78b9b31fff3%28de.slisson.mps.richtext.structure%29%2F2557074442922392300) to add new embeddable nodes to the text.

Commit message:

Add some information to sections that don't have an introduction

src/doc/docs/platform_essentials/common_concepts_and_interfaces.md, after:

---
tags:
- mps_extensions
- mbeddr
- iets3
---

This list explains some common abstract concepts and interfaces that you can use to extend or utilize the functionality of the platforms.
Identifiers starting with a capital "I" refer to interfaces.

## Mbeddr

{{ mbeddr() }} only extends interfaces from *de.slisson.mps.richtext*.

### Base

All common mbeddr interfaces are located in the namespace *com.mbeddr.core.base*.

#### [Assessment](http://mbeddr.com/userguide/UserGuideExport.html#sid3231021218602645814)

To extend assessments, extend the class [AssessmentQuery](AssessmentQuery) to create a new query. The result of the query has to extend the class [AssessmentResult](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F865293814733133833). Extend the interface [AssessmentSummary](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F671216505796427448) to provide a summary of the results.

Example:

![example for an assessment query: interpreter coverage](example_interpreter_coverage.png)


#### Chunk

A node of the class [Chunk](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F7139820346881560230) has several properties: it has a name, acts as a scope provider for elements, and can import other elements or vice versa. It also integrates with the tree view and provides a graph of all the chunk hierarchy, including imports. It also detects dependency cycles.

Example:

![example: simple library with an import](example_library.png)

#### ICommentable

You can comment out concepts or interfaces that implement [ICommentable](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F7024921229556133800) by typing `//` or `/*` in the editor if the node doesn't implement [IEmpty](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F1049346859912912067).

#### IDocumentable

Add support for documenting nodes when implementing the [IDocumentable](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F3857533489766146432) interface. The text node uses the language `de.slisson.mps.richtext` and supported text and embedded nodes.

#### ITreeViewable

Implement [ITreeViewRoot](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F176285146686936640) to use the Tree tool. It is a tool that can show a tree structure.

Example: IETS3 call tree of functions

![iets3 call tree of functions](iets3_calltree.png)

#### IContainerOfUniqueNames

[IContainerOfUniqueNames](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F5095889050031055796) checks that the provided names are indeed unique and shows an error otherwise. For qualified names, implement the interface [IHasQualifiedName](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F5227231181399633032).

#### IDetectCycle

Implement [IDetectCycle](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F5939454523704167063) to detect cyclic dependencies. This feature is used, for example, with chunks that import other chunks.

#### IEmpty

Implement [IEmpty](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F1049346859912912067) to support empty lines. It automatically suppresses error messages, and the implementing concept is also not visible in the outline.

#### Name-Related Interfaces

Use [IIdentifierNamedConcept](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F7024921229555594291) for concepts that should have valid identifiers. Check the [property constraint](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A7a2f88d6-4108-4d29-b499-cc4de14ea970%28com.mbeddr.core.base.constraints%29%2F7024921229555594296) to understand how it works.

[INameAllUpperCase](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F8628579007224193612), [INameFirstCharLowerCase](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F8628579007224192794), and [INameFirstCharUpperCase](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F8628579007224193610) can further constrain the identifier name.

#### IMbeddrIDERoot

Concepts that implement the interface [IMbeddrIDERoot](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Af7764ca4-8c75-4049-922b-08516400a727%28com.mbeddr.core.base.structure%29%2F13085436577882829) show up in the *New Roots* menu. It is visible above the regular *new* menu of the context menu. It adds the following features: a custom name for the menu entry, root concept sorting, and custom categories for the root concepts.

## IETS3

{{ iets3() }} builds on {{ mbeddr() }} interfaces in *de.slisson.mps.richtext*.

### General

The general interfaces deal with integration of solvers and naming concepts. Interfaces for naming are also located in
{{ mbeddr() }} and can be a valid alternative.

#### ISolvable

Implement [ISolvable](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F5067755556171617239) to create solver tasks, executable by solvers such as [Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3). To enable the solver for a node, implement the interface [IUseSolver](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F9051170899708928820). A solver task must extend the concept [AbstractSolverTask](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F8571724170506775997). The concept that can be mapped to the solver must implement [ICanBeMappedToSolver](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A9e71c0de-f9ab-4b67-96cc-7d9c857513f6%28org.iets3.analysis.base.structure%29%2F5553107600697040451).

#### ICanRunCheckManually

Implement [ICanRunCheckManually](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A657c9fde-2f36-4e61-ae17-20f02b8630ad%28org.iets3.core.base.structure%29%2F4450571177430728250) to support running checks that are executed through one of the actions (runAllManuallyOnModel, runAllManuallyOnRoot, runManuallyOnContainer) or intentions. User objects of the node can store the result of the checks. The interface also supports updating the editor with the test results, for example, highlighting the background of a test with color and refreshing the editor.

Example:

![KernelF: run check manually](run_check_manually.gif)


#### IOptionallyNamed

Use the interface [IOptionallyNamed](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A657c9fde-2f36-4e61-ae17-20f02b8630ad%28org.iets3.core.base.structure%29%2F229512757698888199) for concepts that should support an optional name. You can also use this name in smart references.

#### IValidNamedConcept

As an alternative to the mbeddr interfaces, you can use the interface [IValidNamedConcept](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A657c9fde-2f36-4e61-ae17-20f02b8630ad%28org.iets3.core.base.structure%29%2F229512757699383348) for valid identifiers that are valid in KernelF.


### Expressions

To add a new expression, extend the concept [Expression](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7425695345928347719). The new concept is commentable and documentable by default.

#### ICanBeLValue

Implement the interface [ICanBeLValue](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F195141004745586068) when the concept is valid as the [left value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Value_(computer_science)?oldformat=true#Assignment:_l-values_and_r-values) of expressions such as assignments. Variable references, paths, and dot expressions can be left values.

#### IDotTarget

Implement [IDotTarget](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F9002563722476995146) to support custom operations for the dot expression. It can be used, for example, to add new operations for collections, enumerations, math, state machines, and many more.

#### IEmptyLiteral

[IEmptyLiteral](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F915344943735946072) is a marker interface used to mark literals that evaluate to an empty value at runtime.

#### ILiteral

Implement [ILiteral](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7782108600710395780) to add support for a new literal. For primitive types such as integers and strings, extend the concept [PrimitiveLiteral](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F8379605524044170035) instead. Register an extension for the [primitiveTypeMapper](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A6c6155f0-4bbe-4af5-8c26-244d570e21e4%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.plugin%29%2F1085994689350268573) extension point when using custom primitive literals. The standard implementation is the [SimpleTypesPrimitiveTypeMapper](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A5bf19129-2710-45a6-906e-9ee2d0977853%28org.iets3.core.expr.simpleTypes.plugin%29%2F3910975805742593968).

#### Effects

Since KernelF is by default immutable, some language extensions allow side effects, such as the language *org.iets3.core.expr.mutable*. To add custom concepts with effects, implement the interfaces [IMayAllowEffect](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F952298261448780116) and [IMayHaveEffect](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7791618349053901166).

#### IOptionallyTyped

Use the interface [IOptionallyTyped](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7089558164905593724) to add an optional type to an expression. The expression automatically used the provided type as its type.

#### ITraceRoot

Nodes that want to be the root of [[kernelf#tracing|tracing]] should implement the interface [ITraceRoot](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F8505972469205863874)

#### Custom Types

Custom types must extend the concept [Type](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F7425695345928349204). If the type supports a default value (e.g., `false` for the boolean type and `0` for a numeric type), implement the interface [ITypeSupportsDefaultValue](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F6932772747669856399).

#### IWantNewLine

The concepts of expressions that need to be on a new line, such as try expressions, block expressions, and sometimes tables, must implement the interface [IWantNewLine](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F1134276681297127890). This interface affects the layout of some expressions, such as if-expressions and function bodies.

#### Tests

To add a new test statement, extend the concept [AbstractTestItem](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Aba7faab6-2b80-43d5-8b95-0c440665312c%28org.iets3.core.expr.tests.structure%29%2F8219602584783477664). If you need to update the editor after execution of the test item, override the method [performAdditionalEditorUpdate](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A7961970e-5737-42e2-b144-9bef3ad8d077%28org.iets3.core.expr.tests.behavior%29%2F4314247060317840957).

### Top-level

#### IToplevelExprContent

Implement the interface [IToplevelExprContent](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Ada65683e-ff6f-430d-ab68-32a77df72c93%28org.iets3.core.expr.toplevel.structure%29%2F2861782275883475449) to make expression available at the topmost level, like the [ExpressionStatement](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A00000000-0000-4000-0000-011c895902ca%28jetbrains.mps.baseLanguage.structure%29%2F1068580123155) in Base Language.

### Collections

When implementing custom operations for collections such as maps, lists, and sets, use one of the provided concepts as the base concept (for example [NoArgCollectionOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7554398283339795488) and [OneArgCollectionOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7554398283340020764)). If no suitable concept is available, implement one of the interfaces, such as [ICollectionOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7554398283339790458) and [IMapOneArgOp](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A61b1de80-490d-4fee-8e95-b956503290e9%28org.iets3.core.expr.collections.structure%29%2F7757419675865128281). If this is still not possible, you can still implement [IDotTarget](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3A66e07cb4-a4b0-4bf3-a36d-5e9ed1ff1bd3%28org.iets3.core.expr.base.structure%29%2F9002563722476995146) directly.

## MPS Extensions

{{ mps_extensions() }} doesn't have many interfaces because it can be mostly customized by extending editor cells.

### Richtext

#### IWord

Implement [IWord](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=r%3Aca2ab6bb-f6e7-4c0f-a88c-b78b9b31fff3%28de.slisson.mps.richtext.structure%29%2F2557074442922392300) to add new embeddable nodes to the text.
