src/doc/docs/home/platform_specific_bugs.md, before:

## Windows

!!! error "Compilation from the command line might fail due to none ASCII chars."

    The error message looks something like this:

    ```
    [generate] NewLanguage\behavior\rtzj__BehaviorDescriptor.java : Invalid character constant (line: 27) 
    ```
    If this happens, set the environment variable *JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS* to `#!properties -Dfile.encoding=UTF8` (MPS-23526).

!!! warning "Tests are failing with a message, that a filename or extension is too long (Windows)."

    The error message looks like this: `Caused by: java.io.IOException: CreateProcess error=206, The filename or extension is too long`.
    It can also look like this: `Process fork failed.`
    There is a path that is too long for Windows in the build script. 
    Choose the option *compressArgs* in *test modules* node to fix the issue (MPS-24137).

## Mac

!!! question "How do I get my defined environment variables?"

    Execute `printenv` on a shell.

!!! warning "Using ^^com.mbeddr.mpsutil.datepicker^^ doesn't work when look and feel is set to macOS Light."

    Use the default light theme. There is no other workaround at the moment (MPS-3388,MBEDDR-2203).

!!! warning "Can't find TBItem with uid 'XY'."

    This is a MacBook Pro with touchbar related issue. No workaround at the moment (MPS-31728).

!!! question "What other active bugs are there?"

    - Standalone application: impossible to define application icon (MPS-32971)

## Linux

!!! error "Autocompleting doesn't work with MPS + i3 (linux window manager)."

    No solution at the moment (MPS-30499).

!!! warning "Completion menu on wrong screen in multi monitor setup (linux+i3)."

    No solution at the moment (MPS-33689).

Commit message:

Add section about native crashes

src/doc/docs/home/platform_specific_bugs.md, after:

## Native crashes

Native crashes are crashes where MPS crashes internally (C/C++ code) and shows an error dialog. First search the following Youtrack projects:

- [MPS](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issues/MPS): MPS related crashes
- [IntelliJ IDEA](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issues/IDEA): IntelliJ (platform) related crashes
- [JetBrains Runtime](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issues/JBR): mostly UI and JCEF related issues

For crashes on MacOS, have a look at [Identifying the Cause of Common Crashes | developer.apple.com](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/identifying-the-cause-of-common-crashes).

## Windows

!!! error "Compilation from the command line might fail due to none ASCII chars."

    The error message looks something like this:

    ```
    [generate] NewLanguage\behavior\rtzj__BehaviorDescriptor.java : Invalid character constant (line: 27) 
    ```
    If this happens, set the environment variable *JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS* to `#!properties -Dfile.encoding=UTF8` (MPS-23526).

!!! warning "Tests are failing with a message, that a filename or extension is too long (Windows)."

    The error message looks like this: `Caused by: java.io.IOException: CreateProcess error=206, The filename or extension is too long`.
    It can also look like this: `Process fork failed.`
    There is a path that is too long for Windows in the build script. 
    Choose the option *compressArgs* in *test modules* node to fix the issue (MPS-24137).

## Mac

!!! question "How do I get my defined environment variables?"

    Execute `printenv` on a shell.

!!! warning "Using ^^com.mbeddr.mpsutil.datepicker^^ doesn't work when look and feel is set to macOS Light."

    Use the default light theme. There is no other workaround at the moment (MPS-3388,MBEDDR-2203).

!!! warning "Can't find TBItem with uid 'XY'."

    This is a MacBook Pro with touchbar related issue. No workaround at the moment (MPS-31728).

!!! question "What other active bugs are there?"

    - Standalone application: impossible to define application icon (MPS-32971)

## Linux

!!! error "Autocompleting doesn't work with MPS + i3 (linux window manager)."

    No solution at the moment (MPS-30499).

!!! warning "Completion menu on wrong screen in multi monitor setup (linux+i3)."

    No solution at the moment (MPS-33689).
