src/doc/docs/mps_internal/open_api.md, before:

---
tags:
- openapi
---

!!! question "How do you get an icon for a concept?"

    ```java
    GlobalIconManager.getInstance().getIconFor(concept)
    ```

!!! question "How can you copy a language without the new one having duplicate model IDs?"

    ```java
    { =>
    SModule sm = module/module1;
    SModule tm = module/module2;

    map<SNode, SNode> node = new hashmap<SNode, SNode>;

    foreach aspect in LanguageAspect.values {
        SModel s = aspect.get((Language) sm);
        SModel t = aspect.get((Language) tm);
        if(s != null && t!= null) {
            foreach r in new arraylist<SNode>(copy: t.getRootNodes()) {
                ((node<>) r).detach;
            }
            foreach r in CopyUtil.copyAndPreserveId((((sequence<SNode>) s,getRootNodes())).toList, node) {
                t.addRootNode(r)
            }
        }
    }
    }.invoke()
    ```

!!! question "How can you change the default project directory?"

    Put the following code in an application plugin:
    ```java
    // Set default project location 
    string defaultProjectDir = Paths.get(System.getProperty("user.home"), "NewProjectDir").toString();
    GeneralSettings.getInstance().setDefaultProjectDirectory(defaultProjectDir);
    ```

!!! question "How can you execute an MPS action programmatically?"

    Use [ActionUtils](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=742f6602-5a2f-4313-aa6e-ae1cd4ffdc61%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.workbench.action%28MPS.Platform%2F%29%2F%7EActionUtils) to create an event and to run the action:
    
    ```java
    # cast to EditorContext class
    DataContext dataContext = DataManager.getInstance().getDataContext(((EditorContext) editorContext).getNodeEditorComponent()); 
    AnActionEvent event = ActionUtils.createEvent(ActionPlaces.EDITOR_TAB, dataContext); 
    ActionUtils.updateAndPerformAction(action<openHtmlReport>, event);
    ```
    
    Since this code is based on IDEA components, we need to get the `getNodeEditorComponent`, which is not part of the Open API. That's why we need to downcast it to the EditorComponent class.

    Note: `action<…>` comes from the ^^jetbrains.mps.lang.plugin^^ language.

!!! question "How to shut down MPS programmatically?"

    In normal conditions, one can use `#!java ApplicationManager.getApplication().exit()`. If this doesn't work, throw an exception
    on purpose. 

!!! question "How can you react to the opening and closing of projects?"

    Register a {{ mps_url("jetbrains.mps.project.ProjectManagerListener") }} in a plugin via the class 
    {{ mps_url("jetbrains.mps.project.ProjectManager") }}.

!!! question "How do you change a model without creating an undo entry?"

    > Example: Setting a property (=flag) via a button.

    ```java
    repository.getModelAccess().executeUndoTransparentCommand()
    ```

!!! question "How do you work with temporary models?"

    ```java
    try { 
    undo-transparent command with this.mpsProject.getRepository() {
    tmpModel = TemporaryModels.getInstance().createReadOnly(TempModuleOptions.forDefaultModule());
    tmpModel.addRootNode(type);
    TemporaryModels.getInstance().addMissingImports(tmpModel);
    }
    // do something with the node
    } finally {
        undo-transparent command with this.mpsProject.getRepository() {
            tmpModel.removeRootNode(type);
            TemporaryModels.getInstance().dispose(tmpModel);
        }
    }
    ```

!!! question "How can you react to selection changes in the editor?"

    ```java
    editorContext.getSelectionManager().addSelectionListener(new SingularSelectionListenerAdapter() { ... })
    ```

!!! question "How can I delete a model in a module programmatically?"

    Get the model-to-be-deleted as SModel (interface) and use `#!java new ModelDeleteHelper(model).delete();`
    For more context see: [DeleteModeHelper](https://github.com/JetBrains/MPS/blob/master/workbench/mps-workbench/source/jetbrains/mps/workbench/actions/model/DeleteModelHelper.java)

!!! question "How can you programmatically add a language to the *Used Languages* settings of a model?"

    - Module level: `#!java ((AbstractModule) moduleA).addDependency(moduleB.getModuleReference(), false)`
    - Model level: `#!java new ModelImports(model).addUsedLanguage(language)`

    To get the language from a reference, you can call: `MetaAdapterFactory.getLanguage(moduleRef)`.

!!! question "Can a node pointer point to non-root nodes?"

    Yes, for example:

    ```java
    node-ptr/Integer->parseInt->radix/
    ```

!!! question "How can you create an MPS Language programmatically and add it to the current project?"

    ```java
    NewModuleUtil.createLanguage(namespace, rootPath, project, saveProject)
    ```

!!! question "How do I save my project(s)?"

    Use `SRepository.saveAll()`.

    For a single project, for example, `ProjectHelper.getProjectRepository(project).saveAll();`

    For all opened projects, e.g.
    
    ```Java
    foreach project in com.intellij.openapi.project.ProjectManager.getInstance().getOpenProjects() { 
      jetbrains.mps.ide.project.ProjectHelper.getProjectRepository(project).saveAll(); 
    }
    ```

    {{ contribution_by('AlexeiQ') }}

!!! question "How can you convert a quotation to an expression?"

    ```Java
    new QuotationConverter(quotation).convert()
    ```

Commit message:

Add some information to sections that don't have an introduction

src/doc/docs/mps_internal/open_api.md, after:

---
tags:
- openapi
---

This page not only considers the language repository, project modules, languages, and models, which can be accessed through
Open API but also other parts of MPS that can be accessed programmatically.

In general, there are interfaces such as the ones from
*org.jetbrains.mps.openapi* that you can use to programmatically access classes. The implementing classes can be in the same
or a different package. For example, [jetbrains.mps.openapi.editor.EditorComponent](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=1ed103c3-3aa6-49b7-9c21-6765ee11f224%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.openapi.editor%28MPS.Editor%2F%29%2F%7EEditorComponent) is
the interface, [jetbrains.mps.nodeEditor.EditorComponent](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=1ed103c3-3aa6-49b7-9c21-6765ee11f224%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.nodeEditor%28MPS.Editor%2F%29%2F%7EEditorComponent) one of the implementing classes. Especially implementing IntelliJ classes
often have the suffix *Impl*, for example, [DataManagerImpl](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=498d89d2-c2e9-11e2-ad49-6cf049e62fe5%2Fjava%3Acom.intellij.ide.impl%28MPS.IDEA%2F%29%2F%7EDataManagerImpl) is an implementation of [DataManager](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=498d89d2-c2e9-11e2-ad49-6cf049e62fe5%2Fjava%3Acom.intellij.ide%28MPS.IDEA%2F%29%2F%7EDataManager).

!!! question "How do you get an icon for a concept?"

    ```java
    GlobalIconManager.getInstance().getIconFor(concept)
    ```

!!! question "How can you copy a language without the new one having duplicate model IDs?"

    ```java
    { =>
    SModule sm = module/module1;
    SModule tm = module/module2;

    map<SNode, SNode> node = new hashmap<SNode, SNode>;

    foreach aspect in LanguageAspect.values {
        SModel s = aspect.get((Language) sm);
        SModel t = aspect.get((Language) tm);
        if(s != null && t!= null) {
            foreach r in new arraylist<SNode>(copy: t.getRootNodes()) {
                ((node<>) r).detach;
            }
            foreach r in CopyUtil.copyAndPreserveId((((sequence<SNode>) s,getRootNodes())).toList, node) {
                t.addRootNode(r)
            }
        }
    }
    }.invoke()
    ```

!!! question "How can you change the default project directory?"

    Put the following code in an application plugin:
    ```java
    // Set default project location 
    string defaultProjectDir = Paths.get(System.getProperty("user.home"), "NewProjectDir").toString();
    GeneralSettings.getInstance().setDefaultProjectDirectory(defaultProjectDir);
    ```

!!! question "How can you execute an MPS action programmatically?"

    Use [ActionUtils](http://127.0.0.1:63320/node?ref=742f6602-5a2f-4313-aa6e-ae1cd4ffdc61%2Fjava%3Ajetbrains.mps.workbench.action%28MPS.Platform%2F%29%2F%7EActionUtils) to create an event and to run the action:
    
    ```java
    # cast to EditorContext class
    DataContext dataContext = DataManager.getInstance().getDataContext(((EditorContext) editorContext).getNodeEditorComponent()); 
    AnActionEvent event = ActionUtils.createEvent(ActionPlaces.EDITOR_TAB, dataContext); 
    ActionUtils.updateAndPerformAction(action<openHtmlReport>, event);
    ```
    
    Since this code is based on IDEA components, we need to get the `getNodeEditorComponent`, which is not part of the Open API. That's why we need to downcast it to the EditorComponent class.

    Note: `action<…>` comes from the ^^jetbrains.mps.lang.plugin^^ language.

!!! question "How to shut down MPS programmatically?"

    In normal conditions, one can use `#!java ApplicationManager.getApplication().exit()`. If this doesn't work, throw an exception
    on purpose. 

!!! question "How can you react to the opening and closing of projects?"

    Register a {{ mps_url("jetbrains.mps.project.ProjectManagerListener") }} in a plugin via the class 
    {{ mps_url("jetbrains.mps.project.ProjectManager") }}.

!!! question "How do you change a model without creating an undo entry?"

    > Example: Setting a property (=flag) via a button.

    ```java
    repository.getModelAccess().executeUndoTransparentCommand()
    ```

!!! question "How do you work with temporary models?"

    ```java
    try { 
    undo-transparent command with this.mpsProject.getRepository() {
    tmpModel = TemporaryModels.getInstance().createReadOnly(TempModuleOptions.forDefaultModule());
    tmpModel.addRootNode(type);
    TemporaryModels.getInstance().addMissingImports(tmpModel);
    }
    // do something with the node
    } finally {
        undo-transparent command with this.mpsProject.getRepository() {
            tmpModel.removeRootNode(type);
            TemporaryModels.getInstance().dispose(tmpModel);
        }
    }
    ```

!!! question "How can you react to selection changes in the editor?"

    ```java
    editorContext.getSelectionManager().addSelectionListener(new SingularSelectionListenerAdapter() { ... })
    ```

!!! question "How can I delete a model in a module programmatically?"

    Get the model-to-be-deleted as SModel (interface) and use `#!java new ModelDeleteHelper(model).delete();`
    For more context see: [DeleteModeHelper](https://github.com/JetBrains/MPS/blob/master/workbench/mps-workbench/source/jetbrains/mps/workbench/actions/model/DeleteModelHelper.java)

!!! question "How can you programmatically add a language to the *Used Languages* settings of a model?"

    - Module level: `#!java ((AbstractModule) moduleA).addDependency(moduleB.getModuleReference(), false)`
    - Model level: `#!java new ModelImports(model).addUsedLanguage(language)`

    To get the language from a reference, you can call: `MetaAdapterFactory.getLanguage(moduleRef)`.

!!! question "Can a node pointer point to non-root nodes?"

    Yes, for example:

    ```java
    node-ptr/Integer->parseInt->radix/
    ```

!!! question "How can you create an MPS Language programmatically and add it to the current project?"

    ```java
    NewModuleUtil.createLanguage(namespace, rootPath, project, saveProject)
    ```

!!! question "How do I save my project(s)?"

    Use `SRepository.saveAll()`.

    For a single project, for example, `ProjectHelper.getProjectRepository(project).saveAll();`

    For all opened projects, e.g.
    
    ```Java
    foreach project in com.intellij.openapi.project.ProjectManager.getInstance().getOpenProjects() { 
      jetbrains.mps.ide.project.ProjectHelper.getProjectRepository(project).saveAll(); 
    }
    ```

    {{ contribution_by('AlexeiQ') }}

!!! question "How can you convert a quotation to an expression?"

    ```Java
    new QuotationConverter(quotation).convert()
    ```
