src/doc/docs/patterns/language_design.md, before:

---
tags:
- best_practise
- dsl
- safety
- z3
- theory
---

# Language Design

## Patterns

- [Inline Definitions](https://specificlanguages.com/articles/patterns/inline-definitions/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Escape hatch](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/26-language-design-pattern-escape-hatch/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Another form of escape hatch](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-05/23-another-form-of-escape-hatch/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Externalized names](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/08-language-design-pattern-externalized-names/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Empty lines](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/07-language-design-pattern-empty-lines/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Externalized names (and other common attributes)](https://www.f1re.io/externalized-names){{ blog('F1RE') }}
- [Multiple generators for same language](https://www.f1re.io/multi-generators)){{ blog('F1RE') }}
- [High-Level Structure of DSLs: Three Patterns](https://languageengineering.io/high-level-structure-of-dsls-three-patterns-7375c8baa2d3)){{ blog('mv') }}

## General

- [On language design](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-03/08-on-language-design/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [My DSL development process](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/my-dsl-development-process/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Evolving your language gracefully](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/evolving-your-language-gracefully/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Making distinctions](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-01/21-making-distinctions/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [DSLs vs. business rules](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-01/28-dsls-vs-business-rules/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [The Philosophy Behind Language Engineering with MPS](https://languageengineering.io/the-philosophy-behind-language-engineering-with-mps\-9e9c48d8e15b){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Thoughts on Declarativeness](https://languageengineering.io/thoughts-on-declarativeness-fc4cfd4f1832){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Why an Agile Process is not Enough](https://languageengineering.io/why-an-agile-process-is-not-enough-74b131ca67a6){{ blog('langio') }}
- [What makes a good Business DSL](https://languageengineering.io/what-makes-a-good-business-dsl-82b8e15cff99){{ blog('langio') }}
- [What Goes into Language Design … Beyond the Domain](https://languageengineering.io/what-goes-into-language-design-beyond-the-domain-d91ee58e600){{ blog('langio') }}
- [Categorizing the Complexities in Programming](https://languageengineering.io/categorising-the-complexities-in-programming-6f4df8e2e513){{ blog('langio') }}
- [Fusing Modeling and Programming into Language-Oriented Programming](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/fusing-modeling-and-programming-into-language-oriented-programming-9745bc9b47f7){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Context Boundaries in Language Engineering Projects](https://blog.logv.ws/2021/01/08/context-boundaries-in-language-engineering-projects/){{ blog('lv') }}
- [Why documents shouldn't be the basis of domain analysis](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/why-documents-shouldnt-be-the-basis-of-a-domain-analysis-dc46047a346a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [When is something a (domain-specific) language?](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/when-is-something-a-domain-specific-language-83b7eff79ed4){{ blog('mv') }}
- [What is Model Driven Engineering](https://www.f1re.io/model-driven-engineering){{ blog('F1RE') }}
- [Domain-driven design vs. language engineering](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/19-ddd-vs-le/){{ blog('sl') }}

### Introducing DSLs

- [Why it is so hard to change established processes in organizations](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/why-it-is-so-hard-to-change-established-processes-in-organizations-ea78b4dfd090){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Introducing a tool successfully](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/introducing-a-tool-successfully-30bcf59dd99){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The minimum infrastructure for running languages and models](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-minimum-infrastructure-for-running-languages-and-models-da922aa3b4b4){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Why I emphasize DSLs for Domain Experts](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/why-i-emphasize-dsls-for-domain-experts-ddd38860570a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The split brain of DSLs](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-split-brain-of-dsls-9f396761ef1b){{ blog('mv') }}
- [How to run a technical workshop](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/how-to-run-a-technical-workshop-b14e2fd0bda4)

### Perspectives on DSL

- [Knowledge Management](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsl-knowledge-management-7be0d6be3cdc){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Production Knowledge](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsls-production-knowledge-eb314bf5864){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Software Architecture](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsl-software-architecture-fd20ee4bcc23){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Software Quality](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsls-software-quality-26515ce098a){{ blog('mv') }}

### Comparisons

- [DSLs vs. "Learning Languages"](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/dsls-vs-learning-languages-5d5019d519e9){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Low Code or Domain-Specific Languages?](https://blog.logv.ws/2021/10/29/low-code-or-domain-specific-languages/){{ blog('lv') }}
- [Tool Lock-in vs. Semantic Lock-in](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/tool-lock-in-vs-semantic-lock-in-4f87600c7d44){{ blog('mv') }}

### Fachlichkeit

- [An Argument for the Isolation of "Fachlichkeit"](https://languageengineering.io/an-argument-for-the-isolation-of-fachlichkeit-3a67a939d23b){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The Hidden Complexities in Fachlichkeit](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-hidden-complexities-in-fachlichkeit-23884a4d8d0a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The hidden layer between the Fachlichkeit and the -ilities](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-hidden-layer-between-the-fachlichkeit-and-the-ilities-7d850fde00bf){{ blog('mv') }}

## Programming

- [Teaching the Basics of Programming to Domain Experts](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/teaching-the-basics-of-programming-to-domain-experts-fa15a3f51b86){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Thinking vs. Coding](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/thinking-vs-coding-9d11a77e7ac7){{ blog('mv') }}
- [ProgrammingBasics - How to think like a programmer](https://markusvoelter.github.io/ProgrammingBasics/)

## Safety

- [Safety and Security from a Language Engineering Perspective](https://languageengineering.io/safety-and-security-from-a-language-engineering-perspective-24bb5fc92409){{ blog('langio') }}
- [Testing Languages, Generators and Runtimes in a Safety-Critical System](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/testing-languages-generators-and-runtimes-in-a-safety-critical-system-2e8e8d34b62a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Using Language Workbenches and Domain-Specific Languages
  for Safety-Critical Software Development](http://voelter.de/data/pub/MPS-in-Safety-1.0.pdf){{ blog('mv') }}

## Formal Methods

- [An Overview of Program Analysis Using Formal	Methods](http://voelter.de/data/books/introToFormalMethodsAndDSLs-1.1.pdf)
- [Thoughts on Formal Verification and DSLs](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/isola-2018-thoughts-on-formal-verification-and-dsls-3967577aea48){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Thoughts on X-by-Construction](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/isola-2018-thoughts-on-x-by-construction-3f027e1ee024){{ blog('mv') }}

### Z3 Theorem Prover

- [Programming Z3 (tutorial)](https://theory.stanford.edu/~nikolaj/programmingz3.html)
- [Program verification with Z3 (course slides)](https://www.pm.inf.ethz.ch/education/courses/program-verification.html#:~:text=lec%C2%ADtures%20%26%20ex%C2%ADer%C2%ADcises)
- [JavaSMT](https://github.com/sosy-lab/java-smt)
- [Z3Py Guide](https://ericpony.github.io/z3py-tutorial/guide-examples.htm)
- [SMT-Lib](http://smtlib.cs.uiowa.edu/examples.shtml)

Commit message:

Add some information to sections that don't have an introduction

src/doc/docs/patterns/language_design.md, after:

---
tags:
- best_practise
- dsl
- safety
- z3
- theory
---

# Language Design

This page contains many links to articles about language design with MPS and some other topics. If links are missing,
please raise an issue.

## Patterns

- [Inline Definitions](https://specificlanguages.com/articles/patterns/inline-definitions/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Escape hatch](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/26-language-design-pattern-escape-hatch/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Another form of escape hatch](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-05/23-another-form-of-escape-hatch/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Externalized names](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/08-language-design-pattern-externalized-names/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Empty lines](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/07-language-design-pattern-empty-lines/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Externalized names (and other common attributes)](https://www.f1re.io/externalized-names){{ blog('F1RE') }}
- [Multiple generators for same language](https://www.f1re.io/multi-generators)){{ blog('F1RE') }}
- [High-Level Structure of DSLs: Three Patterns](https://languageengineering.io/high-level-structure-of-dsls-three-patterns-7375c8baa2d3)){{ blog('mv') }}

## General

- [On language design](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-03/08-on-language-design/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [My DSL development process](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/my-dsl-development-process/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Evolving your language gracefully](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/evolving-your-language-gracefully/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [Making distinctions](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-01/21-making-distinctions/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [DSLs vs. business rules](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-01/28-dsls-vs-business-rules/){{ blog('sl') }}
- [The Philosophy Behind Language Engineering with MPS](https://languageengineering.io/the-philosophy-behind-language-engineering-with-mps\-9e9c48d8e15b){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Thoughts on Declarativeness](https://languageengineering.io/thoughts-on-declarativeness-fc4cfd4f1832){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Why an Agile Process is not Enough](https://languageengineering.io/why-an-agile-process-is-not-enough-74b131ca67a6){{ blog('langio') }}
- [What makes a good Business DSL](https://languageengineering.io/what-makes-a-good-business-dsl-82b8e15cff99){{ blog('langio') }}
- [What Goes into Language Design … Beyond the Domain](https://languageengineering.io/what-goes-into-language-design-beyond-the-domain-d91ee58e600){{ blog('langio') }}
- [Categorizing the Complexities in Programming](https://languageengineering.io/categorising-the-complexities-in-programming-6f4df8e2e513){{ blog('langio') }}
- [Fusing Modeling and Programming into Language-Oriented Programming](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/fusing-modeling-and-programming-into-language-oriented-programming-9745bc9b47f7){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Context Boundaries in Language Engineering Projects](https://blog.logv.ws/2021/01/08/context-boundaries-in-language-engineering-projects/){{ blog('lv') }}
- [Why documents shouldn't be the basis of domain analysis](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/why-documents-shouldnt-be-the-basis-of-a-domain-analysis-dc46047a346a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [When is something a (domain-specific) language?](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/when-is-something-a-domain-specific-language-83b7eff79ed4){{ blog('mv') }}
- [What is Model Driven Engineering](https://www.f1re.io/model-driven-engineering){{ blog('F1RE') }}
- [Domain-driven design vs. language engineering](https://specificlanguages.com/posts/2022-04/19-ddd-vs-le/){{ blog('sl') }}

### Introducing DSLs

- [Why it is so hard to change established processes in organizations](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/why-it-is-so-hard-to-change-established-processes-in-organizations-ea78b4dfd090){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Introducing a tool successfully](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/introducing-a-tool-successfully-30bcf59dd99){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The minimum infrastructure for running languages and models](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-minimum-infrastructure-for-running-languages-and-models-da922aa3b4b4){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Why I emphasize DSLs for Domain Experts](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/why-i-emphasize-dsls-for-domain-experts-ddd38860570a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The split brain of DSLs](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-split-brain-of-dsls-9f396761ef1b){{ blog('mv') }}
- [How to run a technical workshop](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/how-to-run-a-technical-workshop-b14e2fd0bda4)

### Perspectives on DSL

- [Knowledge Management](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsl-knowledge-management-7be0d6be3cdc){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Production Knowledge](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsls-production-knowledge-eb314bf5864){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Software Architecture](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsl-software-architecture-fd20ee4bcc23){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Software Quality](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/perspectives-on-dsls-software-quality-26515ce098a){{ blog('mv') }}

### Comparisons

- [DSLs vs. "Learning Languages"](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/dsls-vs-learning-languages-5d5019d519e9){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Low Code or Domain-Specific Languages?](https://blog.logv.ws/2021/10/29/low-code-or-domain-specific-languages/){{ blog('lv') }}
- [Tool Lock-in vs. Semantic Lock-in](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/tool-lock-in-vs-semantic-lock-in-4f87600c7d44){{ blog('mv') }}

### Fachlichkeit

- [An Argument for the Isolation of "Fachlichkeit"](https://languageengineering.io/an-argument-for-the-isolation-of-fachlichkeit-3a67a939d23b){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The Hidden Complexities in Fachlichkeit](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-hidden-complexities-in-fachlichkeit-23884a4d8d0a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [The hidden layer between the Fachlichkeit and the -ilities](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/the-hidden-layer-between-the-fachlichkeit-and-the-ilities-7d850fde00bf){{ blog('mv') }}

## Programming

- [Teaching the Basics of Programming to Domain Experts](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/teaching-the-basics-of-programming-to-domain-experts-fa15a3f51b86){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Thinking vs. Coding](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/thinking-vs-coding-9d11a77e7ac7){{ blog('mv') }}
- [ProgrammingBasics - How to think like a programmer](https://markusvoelter.github.io/ProgrammingBasics/)

## Safety

- [Safety and Security from a Language Engineering Perspective](https://languageengineering.io/safety-and-security-from-a-language-engineering-perspective-24bb5fc92409){{ blog('langio') }}
- [Testing Languages, Generators and Runtimes in a Safety-Critical System](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/testing-languages-generators-and-runtimes-in-a-safety-critical-system-2e8e8d34b62a){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Using Language Workbenches and Domain-Specific Languages
  for Safety-Critical Software Development](http://voelter.de/data/pub/MPS-in-Safety-1.0.pdf){{ blog('mv') }}

## Formal Methods

- [An Overview of Program Analysis Using Formal	Methods](http://voelter.de/data/books/introToFormalMethodsAndDSLs-1.1.pdf)
- [Thoughts on Formal Verification and DSLs](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/isola-2018-thoughts-on-formal-verification-and-dsls-3967577aea48){{ blog('mv') }}
- [Thoughts on X-by-Construction](https://markusvoelter.medium.com/isola-2018-thoughts-on-x-by-construction-3f027e1ee024){{ blog('mv') }}

### Z3 Theorem Prover

- [Programming Z3 (tutorial)](https://theory.stanford.edu/~nikolaj/programmingz3.html)
- [Program verification with Z3 (course slides)](https://www.pm.inf.ethz.ch/education/courses/program-verification.html#:~:text=lec%C2%ADtures%20%26%20ex%C2%ADer%C2%ADcises)
- [JavaSMT](https://github.com/sosy-lab/java-smt)
- [Z3Py Guide](https://ericpony.github.io/z3py-tutorial/guide-examples.htm)
- [SMT-Lib](http://smtlib.cs.uiowa.edu/examples.shtml)
