src/doc/docs/reference/tips_for_os_maintainers.md, before:

---
hide:
- toc
tags:
- reference
---

Best practices:

- [Best practices for maintainers | opensource.guide](https://opensource.guide/best-practices/)
- [Seven Ways to Be an Effective Open Source Maintainer](https://www.semasoftware.com/blog/how-can-you-be-an-effective-open-source-maintainer)

Code reviews:

- [The Code Reviewer's Guide | google.github.io](https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review/reviewer/)
- [The Change Author's Guide | google.github.io](https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review/developer/)
- [How to find positive things in a code review?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/333853/how-to-find-positive-things-in-a-code-review)

Tools (general):

- [mps-gradle-plugin](https://github.com/mbeddr/mps-gradle-plugin): Gradle plugin to build & test languages and to support various tasks related to custom RCP packaging.
- [Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material): static documentation generator which uses Markdown
- [Badges for your repository](https://shields.io/)

Tools (GitHub):

- [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions)/[Awesome Actions](https://github.com/sdras/awesome-actions)
- [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com)
- [Find (almost) any GitHub user's email address!](https://emailaddress.github.io/): find out more information about a contributor
- [Publishing Java packages with Maven](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/publishing-packages/publishing-java-packages-with-maven)

Licenses

- [Choose an open-source license](https://choosealicense.com/)
- [How open source licenses work](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-open-source-licenses-work-and-how-to-add-them-to-your-projects-34310c3cf94)

Reference:

- [Github vs Gitlab vs Bitbucket](https://disbug.io/en/blog/github-vs-gitlab-vs-bitbucket)
- [Why do programmers write closed-source applications and then make them free?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/3233/why-do-programmers-write-closed-source-applications-and-then-make-them-free)

Commit message:

Add some information to sections that don't have an introduction

src/doc/docs/reference/tips_for_os_maintainers.md, after:

---
hide:
- toc
tags:
- reference
---

The following sections contain links to articles that help with maintaining an open source project, starting from selecting
the right platform to reviewing code and other best practices.

## Best practices

- [Best practices for maintainers | opensource.guide](https://opensource.guide/best-practices/)
- [Seven Ways to Be an Effective Open Source Maintainer](https://www.semasoftware.com/blog/how-can-you-be-an-effective-open-source-maintainer)

## Code reviews

- [The Code Reviewer's Guide | google.github.io](https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review/reviewer/)
- [The Change Author's Guide | google.github.io](https://google.github.io/eng-practices/review/developer/)
- [How to find positive things in a code review?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/333853/how-to-find-positive-things-in-a-code-review)

## Tools (general)

- [mps-gradle-plugin](https://github.com/mbeddr/mps-gradle-plugin): Gradle plugin to build & test languages and to support various tasks related to custom RCP packaging.
- [Material for MkDocs](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material): static documentation generator which uses Markdown
- [Badges for your repository](https://shields.io/)

## Tools (GitHub)

- [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions)/[Awesome Actions](https://github.com/sdras/awesome-actions)
- [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com)
- [Find (almost) any GitHub user's email address!](https://emailaddress.github.io/): find out more information about a contributor
- [Publishing Java packages with Maven](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/publishing-packages/publishing-java-packages-with-maven)

## Licenses

- [Choose an open-source license](https://choosealicense.com/)
- [How open source licenses work](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-open-source-licenses-work-and-how-to-add-them-to-your-projects-34310c3cf94)

## Reference

- [Github vs Gitlab vs Bitbucket](https://disbug.io/en/blog/github-vs-gitlab-vs-bitbucket)
- [Why do programmers write closed-source applications and then make them free?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/3233/why-do-programmers-write-closed-source-applications-and-then-make-them-free)
